## 10. Using Flow with Room

**Flow APIs are experimental**

Many core APIs of `Flow` are currently marked experimental and are likely to change before the stable release. This codelab will use many experimental APIs and be updated as the APIs develop.

In this step, you learn how to use `Flow` with [`Room`](https://d.android.com/room) and wire it up to the UI.

This step is common for many usages of `Flow`. When used this way, the `Flow` from `Room` operates as an observable database query similar to a `LiveData`.

## **Update the Dao**

To get started, open up `PlantDao.kt`, and add two new queries that return `Flow<List<Plant>>`:

### **PlantDao.kt**

```
@Query("SELECT * from plants ORDER BY name")
fun getPlantsFlow(): Flow<List<Plant>>

@Query("SELECT * from plants WHERE growZoneNumber = :growZoneNumber ORDER BY name")
fun getPlantsWithGrowZoneNumberFlow(growZoneNumber: Int): Flow<List<Plant>>
```

Note that except for the return types, these functions are identical to the `LiveData` versions. But, we'll develop them side-by-side to compare them.

In this codelab, we're going to build the same database transform using the `LiveData` builder and `Flow`. In a production app, you would only include one of these, but it's useful to compare them to each other to see how they work.

By specifying a `Flow` return type, `Room` executes the query with the following characteristics:

- **Main-safety –** Queries with a `Flow` return type always run on the `Room` executors, so they are always main-safe. You don't need to do anything in your code to make them run off the main thread.
- **Observes changes –** `Room` automatically observes changes and emits new values to the flow.
- **Async sequence –** `Flow` emits the entire query result on each change, and it won't introduce any buffers. If you return a `Flow<List<T>>`, the flow emits a `List<T>` that contains all rows from the query result. It will execute just like a sequence – emitting one query result at a time and suspending until it is asked for the next one.
- **Cancellable –** When the scope that's collecting these flows is cancelled, `Room` cancels observing this query.

Put together, this makes `Flow` a great return type for observing the database from the UI layer.

## **Update the repository**

To continue wiring up the new return values to the UI, open up `PlantRepository.kt`, and add the following code:

### **PlantRepository.kt**

```
val plantsFlow: Flow<List<Plant>>
   get() = plantDao.getPlantsFlow()

fun getPlantsWithGrowZoneFlow(growZoneNumber: GrowZone): Flow<List<Plant>> {
   return plantDao.getPlantsWithGrowZoneNumberFlow(growZoneNumber.number)
}
```

For now, we're just passing the `Flow` values through to the caller. This is exactly the same as when we started this codelab with passing the `LiveData` through to the `ViewModel`.

## Update the ViewModel

In `PlantListViewModel.kt`, let's start simple and just expose the `plantsFlow`. We'll come back and add the grow zone toggle to the flow version in the next few steps.

### PlantListViewModel.kt

```
// add a new property to plantListViewModel

val plantsUsingFlow: LiveData<List<Plant>> = plantRepository.plantsFlow.asLiveData()
```

Again, we'll keep the `LiveData` version (`val plants`) around for comparison as we go.

Since we want to keep `LiveData` in the UI layer for this codelab, we'll use the `asLiveData` extension function to convert our `Flow` into a `LiveData`. Just like the `LiveData` builder, this adds a configurable timeout to the `LiveData` generated. This is nice because it keeps us from restarting our query every time the configuration changes (such as from device rotation).

The [`asLiveData`](https://developer.android.com/reference/kotlin/androidx/lifecycle/package-summary#aslivedata) operator converts a `Flow` into a `LiveData` with a configurable timeout.

Just like the `liveData` builder, the timeout will help the `Flow` survive restart. If another screen observes before the timeout, the `Flow` won't be cancelled.

Since flow offers main-safety and the ability to cancel, you can choose to pass the `Flow` all the way through to the UI layer without converting it to a `LiveData`. However, for this codelab we will stick to using `LiveData` in the UI layer.

Also in the `ViewModel`, add a cache update to the `init` block. This step is optional for now, but if you clear your cache and don't add this call, you will not see any data in the app.

### **PlantListViewModel.kt**

```
init {
    clearGrowZoneNumber()  // keep this

    // fetch the full plant list
    launchDataLoad { plantRepository.tryUpdateRecentPlantsCache() }
}
```

## **Update the Fragment**

Open `PlantListFragment.kt`, and change the `subscribeUi` function to point to our new `plantsUsingFlow` `LiveData`.

### **PlantListFragment.kt**

```
private fun subscribeUi(adapter: PlantAdapter) {
   viewModel.plantsUsingFlow.observe(viewLifecycleOwner) { plants ->
       adapter.submitList(plants)
   }
}
```

## **Run the app with Flow**

If you run the app again, you should see that you're now loading the data using `Flow`! Since we haven't implemented the `switchMap` yet, the filter option doesn't do anything.

In the next step we'll take a look at transforming the data in a `Flow`.