## 11. Combining flows declaratively

**Flow APIs are experimental**

Many core APIs of `Flow` are currently marked experimental and are likely to change before the stable release. This codelab will use many experimental APIs and be updated as Flow develops.

In this step, you'll apply the sort order to `plantsFlow`. We'll do this using the *declarative* API of `flow`.

**What is declarative?**

Declarative is an API style that means describing what your program should do instead of how to do it. One of the more commonly known declarative languages is SQL, which allows developers to express what they would like the database to query instead of how to perform the query.

By using transforms like `map`, `combine`, or `mapLatest`, we can express how we would like to transform each element as it moves through the flow declaratively. It even lets us express concurrency declaratively, which can really simplify code. In this section, you'll see how you can use operators to tell `Flow` to launch two coroutines and combine their results declaratively.

To get started, open up `PlantRepository.kt` and define a new private flow called `customSortFlow`:

### **PlantRepository.kt**

```
private val customSortFlow = flow { emit(plantsListSortOrderCache.getOrAwait()) }
```

This defines a `Flow` that, when collected, will call `getOrAwait` and `emit` the sort order.

Since this flow only emits a single value, you can also build it directly from the `getOrAwait` function using [`asFlow`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/kotlin.-function0/as-flow.html).

```
// Create a flow that calls a single function
private val customSortFlow = plantsListSortOrderCache::getOrAwait.asFlow()
```

This code creates a new `Flow` that calls `getOrAwait` and emits the result as its first and only value. It does this by referencing the getOrAwait method using `::` and calling `asFlow` on the resulting `Function` object.

Both of these flows do the same thing, call `getOrAwait` and emit the result before completing.

## **Combine multiple flows declaratively**

Now that we have two flows, `customSortFlow` and `plantsFlow`, let's combine them declaratively!

Add a [`combine`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/combine.html) operator to `plantsFlow`:

### **PlantRepository.kt**

```
private val customSortFlow = plantsListSortOrderCache::getOrAwait.asFlow()

val plantsFlow: Flow<List<Plant>>
   get() = plantDao.getPlantsFlow()
       // When the result of customSortFlow is available,
       // this will combine it with the latest value from
       // the flow above.  Thus, as long as both `plants`
       // and `sortOrder` are have an initial value (their
       // flow has emitted at least one value), any change 
       // to either `plants` or `sortOrder`  will call
       // `plants.applySort(sortOrder)`.
       .combine(customSortFlow) { plants, sortOrder ->
          plants.applySort(sortOrder) 
       }
```

The `combine` operator combines two flows together. Both flows will run in their own coroutine, then whenever either flow produces a new value the transformation will be called with the latest value from either flow.

By using `combine`, we can combine the cached network lookup with our database query. Both of them will run on different coroutines concurrently. That means that while Room starts the network request, Retrofit can start the network query. Then, as soon as a result is available for both flows, it will call the `combine` lambda where we apply the loaded sort order to the loaded plants.

The transformation `combine` will launch one coroutine for each flow being combined. This lets you combine two flows concurrently.

It will combine the flows in a "fair" manner, which means that they'll all get a chance to produce a value (even if one of them is produced by a tight loop).

To explore how the `combine` operator works, modify `customSortFlow` to emit twice with a substantial delay in [`onStart`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/on-start.html) like this:

```
// Create a flow that calls a single function
private val customSortFlow = suspend {() }.asFlow()
   .onStart {
       emit(listOf())
       delay(1500)
   }
```

The transform `onStart` will happen when an observer listens before other operators, and it can emit placeholder values. So here we're emitting an empty list, delaying calling `getOrAwait` by 1500ms, then continuing the original flow. If you run the app now, you'll see that the Room database query returns right away, combining with the empty list (which means it'll sort alphabetically). Then around 1500ms later, it applies the custom sort.

Before continuing with the codelab, remove the `onStart` transform from the `customSortFlow`.

You can use `onStart` to run suspending code before a flow runs. It can even `emit` extra values into the flow, so you could use it to emit a `Loading` state on a network request flow.

## **Flow and main-safety**

`Flow` can call **main-safe** functions, like we're doing here, and it will preserve the normal main-safety guarantees of coroutines. Both `Room` and `Retrofit` will give us main-safety, and we don't need to do anything else to make network requests or database queries with Flow.

This flow uses the following threads already:

- `plantService.customPlantSortOrder` runs on a Retrofit thread (it calls [`Call.enqueue`](https://square.github.io/retrofit/2.x/retrofit/retrofit2/Call.html#enqueue-retrofit2.Callback-))
- `getPlantsFlow` will run queries on a Room [Executor](https://developer.android.com/reference/androidx/room/RoomDatabase.Builder.html#setQueryExecutor(java.util.concurrent.Executor))
- `applySort` will run on the collecting dispatcher (in this case `Dispatchers.Main`)

So if all we were doing was calling suspend functions in `Retrofit` and and using `Room` flows, we wouldn't need to complicate this code with main-safety concerns.

However, as our data set grows in size, the call to `applySort` may become slow enough to block the main thread. `Flow` offers a declarative API called `flowOn` to control which thread the flow runs on.

Add `flowOn` to the `plantsFlow` like this:

### **PlantRepository.kt**

```
private val customSortFlow = plantsListSortOrderCache::getOrAwait.asFlow()

val plantsFlow: Flow<List<Plant>>
   get() = plantDao.getPlantsFlow()
       .combine(customSortFlow) { plants, sortOrder ->
          plants.applySort(sortOrder) 
       }
       .flowOn(defaultDispatcher)
       .conflate()
```

Calling `flowOn` has two important effects on how the code executes:

1. Launch a new coroutine on the `defaultDispatcher` (in this case, `Dispatchers.Default`) to run and collect the flow **before** the call to `flowOn`.
2. Introduces a buffer to send results from the new coroutine to later calls.
3. Emit the values from that buffer into the `Flow` **after** `flowOn`. In this case, that's `asLiveData` in the `ViewModel`.

This is very similar to how `withContext` works to switch dispatchers, but it does introduce a buffer in the middle of our transforms that changes how the flow works. The coroutine launched by `flowOn` is allowed to produce results *faster* than the caller consumes them, and it will buffer a large number of them by default.

In this case, we plan on sending the results to the UI, so we would only ever care about the most recent result. That's what the `conflate` operator does–it modifies the buffer of `flowOn` to store only the last result. If another result comes in before the previous one is read, it gets overwritten.

The operator `flowOn` launches a new coroutine to collect the flow above it and introduces a buffer to write the results.

You can control the buffer with more operators, such as `conflate` which says to store only the last value produced in the buffer.

It's important to be aware of the buffer when using `flowOn` with large objects such as Room results since it is easy to use a large amount of memory buffering results.

## **Run the app**

If you run the app again, you should see that you're now loading the data and applying the custom sort order using `Flow`! Since we haven't implemented the `switchMap` yet, the filter option doesn't do anything.

In the next step we'll take a look at another way to provide main safety using `flow`.