## 12. Switching between two flows

**Flow APIs are experimental**

Many core APIs of `Flow` are currently marked experimental and are likely to change before the stable release. This codelab will use many experimental APIs and be updated as Flow develops.

To finish up the flow version of this API, open up `PlantListViewModel.kt`, where we will switch between the flows based on `GrowZone` like we do in the `LiveData` version.

Add the following code below the `plants` `liveData`:

### **PlantsListViewModel.kt**

```
private val growZoneChannel = ConflatedBroadcastChannel<GrowZone>()

val plantsUsingFlow: LiveData<List<Plant>> = growZoneChannel.asFlow()
    .flatMapLatest { growZone ->
        if (growZone == NoGrowZone) {
            plantRepository.plantsFlow
        } else {
            plantRepository.getPlantsWithGrowZoneFlow(growZone)
        }
    }.asLiveData()
```

Note, this example uses several `@ExperimentalCoroutinesApis`, and it is likely that there will be a more concise version in the final version of the Flow APIs.

This pattern shows how to integrate events (grow zone changing) into a flow. It does exactly the same thing as the `LiveData.switchMap` version–switching between two data sources based on an event.

## **Stepping through the code**

### PlantListViewModel.kt

```
private val growZoneChannel = ConflatedBroadcastChannel<GrowZone>()
```

This defines a new [`ConflatedBroadcastChannel`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.channels/-conflated-broadcast-channel/). This is a special kind of coroutine-based value holder that holds only the last value it was given. It's a thread-safe concurrency primitive, so you can write to it from multiple threads at the same time (and whichever is considered "last" will win).

You can also subscribe to get updates to the current value. Overall, it has the similar behavior to a `LiveData`–it just holds the last value and lets you observe changes to it. However, unlike `LiveData`, you have to use coroutines to read values on multiple threads.

A `ConflatedBroadcastChannel` is often a good way to insert events into a flow. It provides a *concurrency primitive* (or low-level tool) for passing values between several coroutines.

By conflating the events, we keep track of only the most recent event. This is often the correct thing to do, since UI events may come in faster than processing, and we usually don't care about intermediate values.

If you do need to pass all events between coroutines and don't want conflation, consider using a [`Channel`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/coroutines/channels.html) which offers the semantics of a [`BlockingQueue`](https://developer.android.com/reference/java/util/concurrent/BlockingQueue) using suspend functions. The [`channelFlow`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/channel-flow.html) builder can be used to make channel backed flows.

### PlantListViewModel.kt

```
val plantsUsingFlow: LiveData<List<Plant>> = growZoneChannel.asFlow()
```

One of the easiest ways to subscribe to changes in a `ConflatedBroadcastChannel` is to convert it to a `flow`. This creates a `flow` that, when being collected, will subscribe to changes to the `ConflatedBroadcastChannel` and send them on the flow. It does not add any additional buffers, so if the flow's collector is slower than writes to the `growZoneChannel` it'll skip over any results and only emit the most recent.

This is also nice because cancellation of the channel subscription will happen on flow cancellation.

The `asFlow` extension on `ConflatedBroadcastChannel` will convert a `ConflatedBroadcastChannel` into a `Flow` that will have the same conflated behavior as the `ConflatedBroadcastChannel`.

This is an easy way to subscribe to changes in the `ConflatedBroadcastChannel`.

### PlantListViewModel.kt

```
   .flatMapLatest { growZone ->
```

This is exactly the same as `switchMap` from `LiveData`. Whenever the `growZoneChannel` changes its value, this lambda will be applied and it must return a `Flow`. Then, the returned `Flow` will be used as the `Flow` for all downstream operators.

Basically, this lets us switch between different flows based on the value of `growZone`.

Flow's `flatMapLatest` extensions allow you to switch between multiple flows.

### PlantListViewModel.kt

```
if (growZone == NoGrowZone) {
    plantRepository.plantsFlow
} else {
    plantRepository.getPlantsWithGrowZoneFlow(growZone)
}
```

Inside the `flatMapLatest`, we switch based on the `growZone`. This code is pretty much the same as the `LiveData.switchMap` version, with the only difference being that it returns `Flows` instead of `LiveDatas`.

### PlantListViewModel.kt

```
   }.asLiveData()
```

And finally, we convert the `Flow` into a `LiveData`, since our `Fragment` expects us to expose a `LiveData` from the `ViewModel`.

The [`asLiveData`](https://developer.android.com/reference/kotlin/androidx/lifecycle/package-summary#aslivedata) operator will convert a `Flow` into a `LiveData` with a configurable timeout.

Just like the `liveData` builder, the timeout will keep the flow active through rotations so your collection doesn't restart.

## Send a value to the channel

To let the channel know about the filter change, we can call `offer`. This is a regular (non-suspending) function, and it's an easy way to communicate an event into a coroutine like we're doing here.

In the `ViewModel`, call `offer` in both `setGrowZoneNumber` and `clearGrowZoneNumber` like this:

### **PlantListViewModel.kt**

```
fun setGrowZoneNumber(num: Int) {
    growZone.value = GrowZone(num)
    growZoneChannel.offer(GrowZone(num))

    launchDataLoad {
        plantRepository.tryUpdateRecentPlantsForGrowZoneCache(GrowZone(num))
    }
}

fun clearGrowZoneNumber() {
    growZone.value = NoGrowZone
    growZoneChannel.offer(NoGrowZone)

    launchDataLoad {
        plantRepository.tryUpdateRecentPlantsCache()
    }
}
```

## **Run the app again**

If you run the app again, the filter now works for both the `LiveData` version and the `Flow` version!

In the next step, we'll apply the custom sort to `getPlantsWithGrowZoneFlow`.