## 13. Mixing styles with flow

**Flow APIs are experimental**

Many core APIs of `Flow` are currently marked experimental and are likely to change before the stable release. This codelab will use many experimental APIs and be updated as Flow develops.

One of the most exciting features of `Flow` is its first-class support for suspend functions. The `flow` builder and almost every transform exposes a `suspend` operator that can call any suspending functions. As a result, **main-safety** for network and database calls as well as orchestrating multiple async operations can be done using calls to regular suspend functions from inside a flow.

In effect, this allows you to naturally mix declarative transforms with imperative code. As you'll see in this example, inside of a regular map operator you can orchestrate multiple async operations without applying any extra transformations. In a lot of places, this can lead to substantially simpler code than that of a fully-declarative approach.

If you've used libraries like RxJava extensively, this is one of the main differences provided by `Flow`.

As you get started with `Flow`, carefully consider how you can use suspending transforms to simplify your code. In many cases, you can express async code naturally by leaning on suspending operations inside operators like `map`, `onStart`, and `onCompletion`.

Familiar operators from Rx like `combine`, `mapLatest`, `flatMapLatest`, `flattenMerge`, and `flatMapMerge` are best used to orchestrate concurrency in `Flow`.

## **Using suspend functions to orchestrate async work**

To wrap up our exploration of `Flow`, we'll apply the custom sort using suspend operators.

Open up `PlantRepository.kt` and add a map transform to `getPlantsWithGrowZoneNumber`.

### PlantRepository.kt

```
fun getPlantsWithGrowZoneFlow(growZone: GrowZone): Flow<List<Plant>> {
   return plantDao.getPlantsWithGrowZoneNumberFlow(growZone.number)
       .map { plantList ->
           val sortOrderFromNetwork = plantsListSortOrderCache.getOrAwait()
           val nextValue = plantList.applyMainSafeSort(sortOrderFromNetwork)
           nextValue
       }
}
```

By relying on regular suspend functions to handle the async work, this map operation is **main-safe** even though it combines two async operations.

As each result from the database is returned, we'll get the cached sort order–and if it's not ready yet, it will wait on the async network request. Then once we have the sort order, it's safe to call `applyMainSafeSort`, which will run the sort on the default dispatcher.

This code is now entirely main-safe by deferring the main safety concerns to regular suspend functions. It's quite a bit simpler than the same transformation implemented in `plantsFlow`.

In `Flow`, `map` and other operators provide a suspending lambda.

By using the suspend and resume mechanism of coroutines, you can often orchestrate sequential async calls easily without using declarative transforms.

It is an **error** to emit a value from a different coroutine than the one that called the suspending transformation.

If you do launch another coroutine inside a flow operation like we're doing here inside `getOrAwait` and `applyMainSafeSort`, make the value is returned to the original coroutine before `emitting` it.

However, it is worth noting that it will execute a bit differently. The cached value will be fetched every single time the database emits a new value. This is OK because we're caching it correctly in `plantsListSortOrderCache`, but if that started a new network request this implementation would make a lot of unnecessary network requests. In addition, in the `.combine` version, the network request and the database query run *concurrently*, while in this version they run in sequence.

Due to these differences, there is not a clear rule to structure this code. In many cases, it's fine to use suspending transformations like we're doing here, which makes all async operations sequential. However, in other cases, it's better to use operators to control concurrency and provide main-safety.