## 14. Controlling concurrency with flow

**Flow APIs are experimental**

Many core APIs of `Flow` are currently marked experimental and are likely to change before the stable release. This codelab will use many experimental APIs and be updated as Flow develops.

You're almost there! As one final (optional) step, let's move the network requests into a flow-based coroutine.

By doing so, we'll remove the logic for making the network calls from the handlers called by `onClick` and drive them from the `growZoneChannel`. This helps us create a single source of truth and avoid code duplication–there's no way any code can change the filter without refreshing the cache.

Open up `PlantListViewModel.kt`, and add this to the init block:

### **PlantListViewModel.kt**

```
init {
   clearGrowZoneNumber()

   growZoneChannel.asFlow()
       .mapLatest { growZone ->
           _spinner.value = true
           if (growZone == NoGrowZone) {
               plantRepository.tryUpdateRecentPlantsCache()
           } else {
               plantRepository.tryUpdateRecentPlantsForGrowZoneCache(growZone)
           }
       }
       .onCompletion {  _spinner.value = false }
       .catch { throwable ->  _snackbar.value = throwable.message  }
       .launchIn(viewModelScope)
}
```

This code will launch a new coroutine to observe the values sent to `growZoneChannel`. You can comment out the network calls in the methods below now as they're only needed for the `LiveData` version.

### **PlantListViewModel.kt**

```
fun setGrowZoneNumber(num: Int) {
    growZone.value = GrowZone(num)
    growZoneChannel.offer(GrowZone(num))

    // launchDataLoad { 
    //    plantRepository.tryUpdateRecentPlantsForGrowZoneCache(GrowZone(num))
    // }
}

fun clearGrowZoneNumber() {
    growZone.value = NoGrowZone
    growZoneChannel.offer(NoGrowZone)

    // launchDataLoad {
    //    plantRepository.tryUpdateRecentPlantsCache()
    // }
}
```

## **Run the app again**

If you run the app again now, you'll see that the network refresh is now controlled by the channel! We've improved the code substantially, as more ways to change the filter come in the channel acts as a single source of truth for which filter is active. That way the network request and the current filter can never get out of sync.

## **Stepping through the code**

Let's step through all the new functions used one at a time, starting from the outside:

### **PlantListViewModel.kt**

```
growZoneChannel.asFlow()
    // ...
    .launchIn(viewModelScope)
```

The `asFlow` operator will create a flow from our channel, just like we did in `plantsUsingFlow`. This time, however, we use the [`launchIn`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/launch-in.html) operator to collect the flow inside our `ViewModel`.

The operator `launchIn` creates a new coroutine and collects every value from the flow. It'll launch in the `CoroutineScope` provided–in this case, the `viewModelScope`. This is great because it means when this `ViewModel` gets cleared, the `Flow` will be cancelled.

Without providing any other operators, this doesn't do very much–but since `Flow` provides suspending lambdas in all of it's operators it's easy to make async actions based on every value.

Using `Flow`, it's natural to collect data in the `ViewModel`, `Repository`, or other data layers when needed.

Since `Flow` is not tied to the UI, you don't need a UI observer to `collect` a flow. This is a big difference from `LiveData` which always requires a UI-observer to run. It is not a good idea to try to `observe` a `LiveData` in your `ViewModel` because it doesn't have an appropriate observation lifecycle.

### **PlantListViewModel.kt**

```
.mapLatest { growZone ->
    _spinner.value = true
    if (growZone == NoGrowZone) {
        plantRepository.tryUpdateRecentPlantsCache()
     else {
        .tryUpdateRecentPlantsForGrowZoneCache(growZone)
     }
}
```

This is where the magic lies–`mapLatest` will apply this map function for each value. However, unlike regular `map`, it'll launch a new coroutine for each call to the map transform. Then, if a new value is emitted by the `growZoneChannel` before the previous coroutine completes, it'll cancel it before starting a new one.

We can use `mapLatest` to control concurrency for us. Instead of building cancel/restart logic ourselves, the flow transform can take care of it. This code saves a lot of code and complexity compared to writing the same cancellation logic by hand.

Cancellation of a `Flow` follows the normal [cooperative cancellation rules](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/coroutines/cancellation-and-timeouts.html#cancellation-is-cooperative) of coroutines.

If you've used RxJava, you can use `mapLatest` exactly like you'd use `switchMap`.

The key difference is that it provides a suspending lambda for you in a new coroutine, so you can call regular suspend functions directly from `mapLatest`.

### **PlantListViewModel.kt**

```
.onCompletion {  _spinner.value = false }
.catch { throwable -> _snackbar.value = throwable.message }
```

[`onCompletion`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/on-completion.html) will be called every time the flow above it completes. It's the same thing as a finally block – it's a good place to put any code you need to execute during cleanup. Here we're resetting the spinner.

The [`catch`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/catch.html) operator will capture any exceptions thrown above it in the flow. It can emit a new value to the flow like an error state, rethrow the exception back into the flow, or perform work like we're doing here.

When there's an error we're just telling our `_snackbar` to display the error message.

## **Wrapping up**

This step showed you how you can control concurrency using `Flow`, as well as consume `Flows` inside a `ViewModel` without depending on a UI observer.

As a challenge step, try to define a function to encapsulate the data loading of this flow with the following signature:

```
fun <T> loadDataFor(source: ConflatedBroadcastChannel<T>, block: suspend (T) -> Unit) {
```