## 7. liveData: Modifying values

We'll now modify `PlantRepository` to implement a suspending [transform](https://developer.android.com/reference/androidx/lifecycle/Transformations) as each value is processed, learning how to build complex async transforms in `LiveData`. As a prerequisite, let's create a version of the sorting algorithm that's safe to use on the main thread. We can use [`withContext`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines/with-context.html) to switch to another dispatcher just for the lambda and then resume on the dispatcher we started with.

Add the following to `PlantRepository`:

### **PlantRepository.kt**

```
@AnyThread
suspend fun List<Plant>.applyMainSafeSort(customSortOrder: List<String>) =
    withContext(defaultDispatcher) {
        this@applyMainSafeSort.applySort(customSortOrder)
    }
```

To switch between any dispatcher, coroutines uses [`withContext`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines/with-context.html). Calling `withContext` switches to the other dispatcher *just for the lambda* then comes back to the dispatcher that called it with the result of that lambda.

By default, Kotlin coroutines provides three Dispatchers: [`Main`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines/-dispatchers/-main.html), [`IO`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines/-dispatchers/-i-o.html), and [`Default`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines/-dispatchers/-default.html). The IO dispatcher is optimized for IO work like reading from the network or disk, while the Default dispatcher is optimized for CPU intensive tasks.

We can then use this new main-safe sort with the `LiveData` builder. Update the block to use a `switchMap`, which will let you point to a new `LiveData` every time a new value is received.

### **PlantRepository.kt**

```
fun getPlantsWithGrowZone(growZone: GrowZone) =
   plantDao.getPlantsWithGrowZoneNumber(growZone.number)
       .switchMap { plantList ->
           liveData {
               val customSortOrder = plantsListSortOrderCache.getOrAwait()
               emit(plantList.applyMainSafeSort(customSortOrder))
           }
       }
```

Compared to the previous version, once the custom sort order is received from the network, it can then be used with the new main-safe `applyMainSafeSort`. This result is then emitted to the `switchMap` as the new value returned by `getPlantsWithGrowZone`.

Similar to `plants` LiveData above, the coroutine starts execution when it is observed and is terminated either on completion or if either the database or network call fails. The difference here is that it's safe to make the network call in the map since it is cached.

Now let's take a look at how this code is implemented with Flow, and compare the implementations.