## 8. Introducing Flow

**Flow APIs are experimental**

Many core APIs of `Flow` are currently marked experimental and are likely to change before the stable release. This codelab uses many experimental APIs and will be updated as the APIs develop.

We're going to build the same logic using [Flow](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/coroutines/flow.html) from `kotlinx-coroutines`. Before we do that, let's take a look at what a flow is and how you can incorporate it into your app.

A flow is an asynchronous version of a [Sequence](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/sequences.html), a type of collection whose values are lazily produced. Just like a sequence, a flow produces each value on-demand whenever the value is needed, and flows can contain an infinite number of values.

So, why did Kotlin introduce a new `Flow` type, and how is it different than a regular sequence? The answer lies in the magic of `async`. `Flow` includes full support for coroutines. That means you can build, transform, and consume a `Flow` using coroutines. You can also control concurrency, which means coordinating the execution of several coroutines declaratively with `Flow`.

This opens up a lot of exciting possibilities.

**A Flow is an async sequence of values**

`Flow` produces values one at a time (instead of all at once) that can generate values from *async* operations like network requests, database calls, or other *async* code. It supports coroutines throughout its API, so you can transform a flow using coroutines as well!

`Flow` can be used in a fully-reactive programming style. If you've used something like `RxJava` before, `Flow` provides similar functionality. Application logic can be expressed succinctly by transforming a flow with functional operators such as [`map`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/map.html), [`flatMapLatest`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/coroutines/flow.html#flatmaplatest), [`combine`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/coroutines/flow.html#combine), and so on.

`Flow` also supports suspending functions on most operators. This lets you do sequential async tasks inside an operator like `map`. By using suspending operations inside of a flow, it often results in shorter and easier to read code than the equivalent code in a fully-reactive style.

In this codelab, we're going to explore using both approaches.

## **How does flow run**

To get used to how Flow produces values on demand (or lazily), take a look at the following flow that emits the values `(1, 2, 3)` and prints before, during, and after each item is produced.

```
fun makeFlow() = flow {
   println("sending first value")
   emit(1)
   println("first value collected, sending another value")
   emit(2)
   println("second value collected, sending a third value")
   emit(3)
   println("done")
}

scope.launch {
   makeFlow().collect { value ->
       println("got $value")
   }
   println("flow is completed")
}
```

If you run this, it produces this output:

```
sending first value
got 1
first value collected, sending another value
got 2
second value collected, sending a third value
got 3
done
flow is completed
```

You can see how execution bounces between the [`collect`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/collect.html) lambda and the [`flow`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/flow.html) builder. Every time the flow builder calls [`emit`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/-flow-collector/emit.html), it `suspends` until the element is completely processed. Then, when another value is requested from the flow, it `resumes` from where it left off until it calls emit again. When the `flow` builder completes, the `Flow` is cancelled and `collect` resumes, letting and the calling coroutine prints "flow is completed."

The call to `collect` is very important. `Flow` uses suspending operators like `collect` instead of exposing an `Iterator` interface so that it always knows when it's being actively consumed. More importantly, it knows when the caller can't request any more values so it can cleanup resources.

`Flow` is built from the ground up using coroutines. By using the `suspend` and `resume` mechanism of coroutines, they can synchronize the execution of the producer (`flow`) with the consumer (`collect`).

If you've used reactive streams and are familiar with the concept of backpressure, it is implemented in `Flow` by suspending a coroutine.

## **When does a flow run**

The `Flow` in the above example starts running when the `collect` operator runs. Creating a new `Flow` by calling the `flow` builder or other APIs does not cause any work to execute. The suspending operator `collect` is called a **terminal operator** in `Flow`. There are other suspending terminal operators such as [`toList`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/to-list.html), [`first`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/first.html) and [`single`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/single.html) shipped with `kotlinx-coroutines`, and you can build your own.

By default `Flow` will execute`:`

- Every time a terminal operator is applied without memory of the last run
- Until the terminal operator is cancelled
- When the last value has been fully processed, and another value has been requested

These rules are the *default* behavior of `Flow` and it is possible to make a `Flow` that has memory, doesn't restart for every terminal operator, and executes independently of collection with built-in or custom transformations of a `Flow`.

Executing a `Flow` is called **collecting** a flow. By default, a `Flow` will not do anything until it has been **collected** which means applying any **terminal operator**.

```
myFlow.toList() // toList collects this flow and adds the values to a List
```

We also say an individual value is **collected** from the `Flow` by a terminal operator.

```
myFlow.collect { item -> println("$item has been collected") }
```

Because of these rules, a `Flow` can participate in structured concurrency, and it's safe to start long-running coroutines from a `Flow`. There's no chance a `Flow` will leak resources, since they're always cleaned up using [coroutine cooperative cancellation rules](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/coroutines/cancellation-and-timeouts.html#cancellation-is-cooperative) when the caller is cancelled.

Lets modify the flow above to only look at the first two elements using the [`take`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/take.html) operator, then collect it twice.

```
scope.launch {
   val repeatableFlow = makeFlow().take(2)  // we only care about the first two elements
   println("first collection")
   repeatableFlow.collect()
   println("collecting again")
   repeatableFlow.collect()
   println("second collection completed")
}
```

Running this code, you'll see this output:

```
first collection
sending first value
first value collected, sending another value
collecting again
sending first value
first value collected, sending another value
second collection completed
```

The `flow` lambda starts from the top each time `collect` is called. This is important if the flow performed expensive work like making a network request. Also, since we applied the [`take(2)`](https://kotlin.github.io/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines.flow/take.html) operator, the flow will only produce two values. It will not resume the flow lambda again after the second call to `emit`, so the line "second value collected..." will never print.

By default, a `Flow` will restart from the top every time a terminal operator is applied. This is important if the `Flow` performs expensive work, such as making a network request.