## 9. Going async with flow

OK, so `Flow` is lazy like a `Sequence`, but how is it also async? Let's take a look at an example of an async sequence–observing changes to a database.

In this example, we need to coordinate data produced on a database thread pool with observers that live on another thread such as the main or UI thread. And, since we'll be emitting results repeatedly as the data changes, this scenario is a natural fit for an async sequence pattern.

Imagine you're tasked with writing the [`Room`](https://developer.android.com/topic/libraries/architecture/room) integration for `Flow`. If you started with the existing suspend query support in `Room`, you might write something like this:

```
// This code is a simplified version of how Room implements flow
fun <T> createFlow(query: Query, tables: List<Tables>): Flow<T> = flow {
    val changeTracker = tableChangeTracker(tables)

    while(true) {
        emit(suspendQuery(query))
        changeTracker.suspendUntilChanged()
    }
}
```

This code relies upon two imaginary suspending functions to generate a `Flow`:

- `suspendQuery` – a main-safe function that runs a regular `Room` suspend query
- `suspendUntilChanged` – a function that suspends the coroutine until one of the tables changes

When collected, the flow initially `emits` the first value of the query. Once that value is processed, the flow resumes and calls `suspendUntilChanged`, which will do as it says–suspend the flow until one of the tables changes. At this point, nothing is happening in the system until one of the tables changes and the flow resumes.

When the flow resumes, it makes another main-safe query, and `emits` the results. This process continues forever in an infinite loop.

## **Flow and structured concurrency**

But wait–we don't want to leak work! The coroutine isn't very expensive by itself, but it repeatedly wakes itself up to perform a database query. That's a pretty expensive thing to leak.

Even though we've created an infinite loop, `Flow` helps us out by supporting structured concurrency.

The only way to consume values or iterate over a flow is to use a terminal operator. Because all terminal operators are suspend functions, the work is bound to the lifetime of the scope that calls them. When the scope is cancelled, the flow will automatically cancel itself using the regular [coroutine cooperative cancellation rules](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/coroutines/cancellation-and-timeouts.html#cancellation-is-cooperative). So, even though we've written an infinite loop in our flow builder, we can safely consume it without leaks due to structured concurrency.

**Flow supports structured concurrency**

Because a flow allows you to consume values only with terminal operators, it can support structured concurrency.

When the consumer of a flow is cancelled, the entire `Flow` is cancelled. Due to structured concurrency, it is impossible to leak a coroutine from an intermediate step